Presentation Summary - Jini Technology

My third presentation topic was on Jini technology.  This was a very
interesting presentation for me as I had no knowledge of Jini technology before
beginning my Jini research.  Many of the concepts involved in Jini have strong
ties to both networking concepts and Java concepts therefore it was fairly easy
for me to pull all of the information together.

I started my presentation by explaining what Jini technology is.  While it
takes some time to wade through the hype on Sun's site, I found that Jini
technology was simply a way to share Java objects over a network.  Its
implementation relies heavily on the concept of lookup servers being used to
manage the object available on a network.  Servers, that is computers that are
willing to provide a service, register a proxy with the lookup server.  The
proxy is the minimal amount of information that will be need by clients to
instantiate and use the objects provided by the server.  Clients request
services form the lookup server.  If the requested service is available, the
lookup server will deliver the proxy to the client and thereafter the client
can interact directly with the server via the proxy.  Many of these ideas are
present in other networking technologies and programming paradigms.

I spent a fair amount of time talking about the proxy that is registered with
the lookup server in Jini technology.  It is important to understand that by
using the proxy the inefficiency of moving entire class files across the
network is avoided.  In addition, the backend implementation can be easily
changed while the same proxy manages outside interaction, thus allowing very
simple modification and updates.

With the basics of Jini technology out of the way I began to discuss the usages
of such technology.  One major usage of Jini technology is to tie together
computer systems that would otherwise need custom programming for
intercommunication.  Because of the prevalence of the Java technology, Jini can
be the glue that ties together any kind of service that a specific computer
system may provide.  I also spent some time talking about the tremendous
benefit that Jini can offer wireless users.  Because the lookup servers are
fast and flexible, users that move in and out of range of a wireless connection
can quickly connect to services of the network and provide services to the
network without worrying about configuration issues.

In the final segment of my presentation I talked about companies that have
successfully deployed Jini technology.  These stories came from Sun's website
and included a variety of industries, however, it seemed that the military was
certainly one of the stronger participants in Jini technology.  I talked about
how the Maui High Performance Computing Center used Jini to facilitate
simulation exercises for the United States Navy.  I also talked about a company
called eko systems, inc., and their usage of Jini technology in the medical
industry.

I concluded my talk with a look to the future of Jini technology.  I noted that
Jini was similar to other technologies talked about in class as it is still in
the early stages and not yet widely deployed.  Sun's position is that all is
well and Jini is slowly being adopted as the number one choice in distributed
object technology.  Others, such as Microsoft, may feel that Jini is not being
adopted, and that technologies like DCOM and CORBA will be the dominant
technology in the field.

http://www.sun.com/jini/, Sun's own website for Jini information.

http://www.jini.org, Another website full of Jini information.














