David J. Burger
ICS 321 Sec. 452
5/28/01

2.2)  Give an example, other than the one given in this chapter, of a relation that is likely 
to have problems when it is updated.  Use relation R1 as an example.

Suppose we have a reservation management application that contains a table, called 
Reservations, which store the reservations scheduled for a particular tour company.  Also 
suppose that the designers decided to include in that table fields that store the Name, 
PhoneNumber, and EmailAddress of the agent that booked the reservation.  Now if an 
agent were to change his Name, PhoneNumber, or EmailAddress we have the problem of 
updating all the records in the Reservations table that refer to that agent.  Another 
problem is the potential for a large amount of duplicated data in the Reservations table.

2.3)  Transpose the relation in your answer to Question 2.2 into two or more relations that 
do not have update problems.  Use relations R2 and R3 as examples.

The above problem stated in 2.2 can be solved by creating a new table that we will call 
Agents.  In the Agents table we will store the data about an agent that books for our tour 
company, such as Name, PhoneNumber, and EmailAddress.  An additional field, 
AgentID, will be used as the primary key to uniquely identify the agents.  The 
Reservations table will now keep track of the agent booking a reservation by having a 
field called AgentID in its table to hold the foreign key AgentID from the Agents table.  
Now, if the information about an agent changes, only one record in the Agents table 
needs to be modified.  In addition, only the foreign key AgentID is required in the 
Reservations table so the duplication of data problem is eliminated.

2.13)  What are business rules?  Give an example of possible business rules for the 
relations in your answer to Question 2.11.

Business rules are restrictions on a business’s activities that need to be enforced in the 
database and database applications.

Once again suppose we are working with a reservation management system.  Let’s say 
that the reservations that we are tracking are reservations for helicopter tour flights.  An 
example of a 1:N relationship between two tables would be the relationship between a 
Reservations table and a Passengers table.  Each individual reservation can contain many 
passengers.  In addition, we could have a table called Flights with a 1:N relationship to 
Reservations.  Each flight can contain many reservations.  With this type of data schema, 
two very obvious business rule that would need to be enforced would be that a flight is 
limited to a certain number of passengers and a certain weight.

2.17)  What is the first important task in developing a database and related applications?

The first important task in developing a database and related applications is the learning 
and recording of the users’ model of the data.  After this data model is recorded it 
becomes the foundation for all development.  The data model is inferred from users’ 
statements, forms, reports, and the queries that users need to execute against the data.

2.24)  Consider the statement “A database is a model of the users’ model of reality.”  
How does it differ from “A database is a model of reality”?  Suppose two developers 
disagree about a data model, and one of them asserts, “My model is a better 
representation of reality.”  What does this person really mean?  What differences are 
likely to result when a developer believes the first statement more than the second 
statement?

In the second statement we are led to believe that a proper database design involves 
trying to use a database to make a model of reality while the first statement asserts that a 
database should model the users’ model of reality.  Obviously these goals are quite 
different.  A true model of reality involves a tremendous amount of detail and 
unnecessary effort.  Designing with the users’ model of reality in mind should result in 
the proper amount of detail with a design that solves the problems that the business needs 
to solve.

Hopefully, if one developer says “My model is a better representation of reality,” he 
really means that his model is a better representation of the users’ model.  Otherwise his 
design goals are based on the misguided premise of attempting to model reality.  If two 
developers are working together on a project and they have different viewpoints on this 
issue it is highly likely that they will have a tough time agreeing on later development 
issues.  This question reminds us that philosophical methods used in the design process 
should be discussed before starting a project to avoid inevitable delays from contrasting 
viewpoints.

