David J. Burger
ICS 321 Sec. 452
6/20/01

8.6)  Describe three reasons for using indexes.

One reason that we would use indexes it to allow rows to be quickly accessed using the 
indexed attribute’s value.  A second reason we would use indexes is if we desire to sort 
our rows based on the indexed attribute.  Lastly, we may index in order to facilitate the 
maintenance of an attribute with unique values.  In all cases performance is greatly 
improved because the index maintains a data structure designed to be algorithmically 
efficient for tasks such as these.

8.10)  What aspects of a database design need to be defined to the DBMS?

The types of database design methodologies that we have studied (E-R and Semantic 
Object models) use a relational model to express database design.  Most DBMS products 
of this time are based on the relational model and therefore we must simple define our 
existing relational design to the DBMS.  If we were to implement our relational design to 
DBMS systems not based upon the relational model, design conversion will be necessary.  
Two such non-relational examples discussed in our book have been Object Oriented 
Database Systems and CODASYL DBTG DBMS.

The way in which the relational design is defined varies among DBMS products.  Some 
products, such as Access, provide visual design tools that can be used to define the 
structure of tables, indexes, and relationships.  Other products, such as large DBMS 
products like Oracle, use data definition language statements stored in text files to create 
the database schema.

8.11)  Give an example, other than the one in this text, in which the allocation of the 
database to physical media is important.

Consider an application that a stock brokerage uses to keep track of customers and 
trading activity.  Suppose that they are planning to deploy this application on a system 
with one large, fast disk and one smaller, slower disk.  The application contains 
CUSTOMER and TRANSACTION relations.  With the stock boom of the late 90’s, 
many customers began using day trading techniques.  This resulted in a high number of 
transactions needing to be processed very quickly.  In order to handle the volume and 
throughput of transaction data it would be preferably to store the TRANSACTION 
relation on the larger, faster disk.  The CUSTOMER relation, which contains a smaller 
amount of data that changes infrequently, could be placed on the smaller, slower disk.
