David J. Burger
ICS 321 Sec. 452
5/22/01

1.6)  Explain the nature and function of each of the components of Figure 1-9.

In Figure 1-9 the components of a database application are pictured.  At the far left of the 
diagram we see the users.  The users and the uses of the data are the guiding force in the 
development of the database application.  Database applications must be designed to 
model the users’ model of the data so that the application will effectively represent the 
data and also feel like a natural implementation of that model.  The users perception of 
the database application will be a large factor in the success or failure of the application.  
At the next level we see boxes representing the applications that the user interacts with to 
manage the data.  The application can take a variety of forms from executable programs 
that reside on client machines to “thin clients” that operate within the confines of a web 
browser.  The application interfaces to the database via the database management system 
or DBMS.  The DBMS accesses the data and provides applications with a standard 
method for interfacing with that data.  At the far right we see the database.  The database 
is the self-describing collection of integrated records.  Taken as a whole the diagram 
represents the components of a typical database application.
 
1.12)  Explain why a database is a model.  Describe the difference between a model of 
reality and a model of a user’s model of reality.  Why is this difference important?

A database is a model in that it attempts to represent a set of data and the ways that data 
needs to be managed, updated, combined, processed, and used in reports.  One might 
think that it would be the database designers goal to model reality, however, this is not 
the case.  In actuality a database is a model of the users’ model of reality.  In this way a 
database becomes an efficient mechanism for managing the necessary aspects of the data 
without the burden of being an exact model of reality.  This difference is important for 
the database designer to build a focused design in which relevant details are handled in a 
natural and effective manner and irrelevant details are left out.

1.13)  Give an example, other than one in this chapter, of a personal database application.

I thought of two examples of personal database applications.  First, an independent 
software developer could maintain a database of customers and jobs.  I found this 
example to be very similar to the house painting example from the book so I figured I 
would come up with another example.  The second example I came up with is a 
basketball coach or manager could maintain a database of basketball statistics.  The 
database at a minimum would need tables for the team, players, statistics, and games.  
This design would also allow for interesting relationships between the tables and 
extensive reporting options would be necessary.



Project A

I was able to configure a Dell Inspiron system with a lot of nice features for under $2500.  
I would have to say that more than one database is used to support the site.  Data that is 
used in the support section of the site is almost certainly in a different database than data 
used in the custom quoting portion of the site.

The diverse data on the site includes account pages, order status, support information, and 
a shopping cart application allowing the custom configuration of computer systems.  
Most of the Dell web site can achieve great benefits by using database technology instead 
of using static web pages or prices/features hard coded into applications.  The portion of 
the site that can receive the most benefit from this is probably the feature of the site that 
allows the custom configuration of computer systems.  Having the various features and 
accessories available to the consumer stored in a database allows updates to be made by 
merely adjusting the data in the database instead of the tedious task of modifying web 
pages directly.  This becomes of extreme importance when prices and standard features 
can change rapidly.  Overall this web site is a great example of a site that is using 
database technology in an effective manner.
