David J. Burger
ICS 321 Sec. 452
7/18/01

11.3) What is TCP/IP, and how is it used?

TCP/IP stands for Terminal Control Program/Internet Protocol and it is the communications protocol used on the Internet.

11.10) What is MIME and how is it used?

MIME stands for Multipurpose Internet Mail Code.  The MIME standard defines the codes that represent various file types.  In this clients receiving files can determine file types and can make a decision as to which program should be used to process a given file.  The reason mail is in the name is because the standard was initially developed for mail, however, the MIME standard is used most frequently in processing HTML.

11.13) What is the purpose of a firewall?

The purpose of a firewall is to filter the traffic between two networks.  They are configured to prohibit certain traffic and allow other traffic through.

11.14) List and briefly describe three types of database publishing on the Web.

Static report publishing is one type of database publishing on the Web.  With this type of publishing tools are used to create an HTML page generated from the data within the database.  While the page is static, methods can be used to regenerate the page at certain intervals.  A second type of report publishing is DB query publishing.  With this type of publishing a query is generated by the client that is then submitted to the DBMS on the server.  The DBMS executes the query against the database and then returns the results formatted into a returned web page.  The last type of database publishing on the Web is application publishing.  Application publishing features large database applications with many data entry forms and reports.  They support the logic and concurrency control of ordinary database applications.

11.16)  Explain how the three-tier architecture allows for interoperability of operating systems and Web products.

The three-tier architecture in terms of the Web consists of a client (browser), a web server, and services the web server connects to (DBMS).  The client makes requests to the server and then renders the returned data.  Code can also be executed on the client to assist in materialization and calculations.  The web server takes requests from the client, connects to server resources as necessary, and then sends a result back to the client.  The DBMS accepts query requests from the web server, executes necessary processing, and returns result sets to the web server.  Different tiers of the application can be running different operating systems and products.  Using standard protocols and techniques facilitates communication.

11.24) Why are standards important for markup languages?

Without standards vendors have a tendency to modify markup languages in their own specific way.  After a time, this would result in a WWW in which specific pages need specific browsers in order to be rendered correctly.  With standards, guidelines are in place for the creators of browsers and web pages to provide maximum interoperability.

11.26)  Why do vendors have a love/hate relationship with standards?

Vendors love standards because they provide order in the marketplace and state the base capabilities that a product should have.  On the other hand, standards may be despised because they invalidate features in which vendors have made a significant investment.  They also present a problem to a company’s business model.  If the company only conforms to the standard, there will be no reason for anyone to choose them over any other standard compliant product.  If on the other hand they extend the standard with features to differentiate themselves they will be criticized for not adhering to the standard.

11.35)  Explain why there is too much freedom with HTML.

Is there too much freedom with HTML?  From one perspective, the ease of use of HTML contributed to the early explosive growth of the World Wide Web.  Some people might say that HTML was excellent for what it was designed for.  On the other hand, people may complain that HTML does not have the features to do the types of things that people want to do to make the data more useful, that is, it lacked features that defined the structure of a document.  For example, heading tags could be used to mark headings or just to change the appearance of a string of text.  Thus there is no way to determine the structure of the document from an HTML page.  XML is a technology that is designed to fix this problem.  With XML, the structure, content, and materialization of a document are separated.  I feel that HTML was an important step in the development of the WWW and now it will be interesting to watch HTML fade as it is replaced with a new technology such as XML.

11.42) Why is XML important to database applications?

XML provides many benefits to database applications.  First, XML provides a standard way for expressing database views.  Second, XML provides a clean separation between structure, content, and materialization.  Third, it provides the means to check the validity of a document.  Lastly, the XML standard will lead to standards for document types, thus increasing interoperability.

11.45)  Visit www.w3.org and determine what is the current recommended standard for HTML.  How does it differ from that described in this chapter?  Is there a new standard for HTML underway?  If so, what is it and what new features will it have?

I found a wealth of information available on the w3.org web site.  According to the site, the latest recommended standard for HTML is 4.01, while our book mentions 4.0.  The differences between HTML 4.01 and 4.0 are very slight, most of which were to fix problems found in the 4.0 standard.  From my research it appears that a new version of HTML is not in the works, and, it appears that HTML will evolve into XHTML, a version of HTML more tightly coupled with XML.  XHTML 1.0 has been released and efforts on XHTML 2.0 are currently underway.  The functionality of XHTML 2.0 is expected to remain similar to that of XHTML 1.0, however, it may be modified semantically and syntactically to conform to XML standards.

13.1)  Describe why the data environment for Web servers is complicated.

A rich data environment is available on the server with data coming from many different sources.  In integrating this data, application developers will need to know how to read and incorporate data from Oracle, DB2, SQL server, email sources, spread sheets, non-relational databases, and so forth.  Using each one of these data sources involves learning a new programming interface.  Technologies have been created to address this problem such as ODBC and OLE DB.

13.3)  Explain the author’s justification for describing Microsoft standards.  Do you agree?

The author justifies describing these standards because they have become very prominent in the computing world.  The readers of the book are likely to use such standards in the future because of the prevalence of Windows.  In addition, the author states that OLE DB and ADO are “excellent.”  I feel that his argument is justified, and, because of the “excellent” and object oriented foundation of the latest Microsoft database interface technologies, any other evolving technologies are likely to be similar.  Therefore, learning these technologies should benefit us regardless of the technology we use in the future.

13.4)  Name the components of the ODBC standard.

The components are the application, the driver manager, the DBMS driver, and the data source.  The data source is the database, its associated DBMS, operating system, and network platform.

13.13)  Explain the difference among the three types of data sources.

A file data source contains the information for an ODBC data connection in a single file that can be shared among database users.  A user data source contains the same information but is only available to the user that created it.  A system data source is one that is local to a single computer.

13.14)  Which data source type is recommended for Web servers?

The best choice for a Web server is a system data source on the Web server.  With this method browsers connect to the Web server and the Web server uses the system data source to set up a connection to the database.

13.24)  What is the difference between an interface and an implementation?

An interface consists of the properties and methods of an object available to the outside world.  The implementation concerns the manner in which the methods do their work.  With object-oriented programming the implementation is kept hidden and clients of a class do not need to know how an object implements its interface.

13.25)  Explain why an implementation can be changed but an interface should not be changed.

Because the implementation is hidden, it can be changed without adverse effects on the users of the class.  Conversely, once an object class is in use, and users are relying on a certain interface, changes to the interface can “break” the code of others.  Therefore it is important that you do not make changes to your existing interface once you have released your object to the outside you world.  While modifying the existing interface is a problem, adding to the interface is ok, as you do not have the problem of changing methods and properties that someone is already using.

13.49)  Microsoft expends much effort to promulgate the OLE DB and ADO standards.  It does not directly receive revenue from these standards.  IIS is free with Windows NT and Windows 2000.  Its web site has numerous examples of articles to help developers learn more, and all of it is free.  Why do you think Microsoft does this?  What goal is served?

The bottom line is that Microsoft is a business that wants to be as successful as possible.  This, of course, involves making money.  When Microsoft provides products and extensive educational materials for free it is doing this to further the Microsoft platform, thus increasing sales.  The examples given in the question are very good.  For example, Microsoft does, in fact, have extensive “how to” material available for free on their web sites.  Much of it is devoted to OLE DB and ADO, solid Microsoft technologies.  This information helps to build a community of people knowledgeable about the Microsoft platform which spurs sales of Windows and thus dominoes to other Microsoft products as well.
