David J. Burger
ICS 321 Sec. 452
7/07/01

12.1)  Justify the statement “The databases used in Internet or intranet applications can 
become immeasurable valuable assets.”  Use Amazon.com or Dell Computer as 
examples.

The database of any company is a highly valuable asset.  When that database is directly 
connected to the customer via the Internet the value is magnified.  Amazon.com is a 
company that has attempted to become the world’s largest online retailer.  Any problems 
with the database system that cause even a small amount of downtime can cost Amazon 
thousands of dollars.  In addition, the database contains the information that is the 
lifeblood of the company.  The database that keeps track of inventory must be correct and 
current so that realistic shipping times can be presented to the customer.  Information 
gathered from previous shopping data can help to indicate other products the customer 
might be interested in, promoting further sales.  In the age of the Internet, a database truly 
becomes an invaluable company asset.

12.3)  Are the ideas in this chapter new?  If not, why are they important to you now?

These ideas are not new in that they apply to any situation in which people must 
coordinate their efforts when working together on the same project.  The increased 
importance comes from the extreme number of users that can be involved on working 
with a database, especially in terms of an internet deployed database, at the same time.  
As a person involved in the design of databases and development of applications that 
access these databases, the proper handling of concurrent access becomes of prime 
importance.

12.4)  Explain the meaning of the word inappropriately in the phrase “one user’s work 
does not inappropriately influence another user’s work.”

When multiple users simultaneously use a database application transactions must be 
integrated in a logically consistent manner.  Obviously, when using the database, the 
work of one user affects other users, as it should.  For example, when one user registers 
an order for a company the decreased inventory should be visible to other users.  
Problems occur when one user’s work inappropriately influences another user’s work.  
Such problems can occur when users simultaneously access and update records therefore 
producing a lost update.  This can leave the database in an inconsistent state.



12.8)  Give an example, other than the one in this text, of the lost update problem.

Lost updates occur when two users obtain data that was correct at the time they obtained 
the data and then updates are made based upon that data.  One of the users updates 
relevant to the original data will be lost depending on the timing of the transactions.  As 
an example imagine a reservation system where two users attempt to set up a reservation 
for the same time slot.  When the data reads initiated by both users check the availability 
of the date it is seen as clear.  Then data writes are attempted by both users to schedule a 
reservation for that date.  The user that writes last will have the recorded reservation and 
the other reservation will be lost.

12.35)  Why is it important to write to the log before changing the database values?

If a system is set up to execute a transaction, and then write to the log, a failure before 
writing to the log the database would be changed but there would be no record of the 
change.  This could lead to duplicate transactions when restoring the database.  If instead 
we write the log and then update the database, the worst thing that can happen is an 
unapplied transaction.

12.51)  Describe the advantages and disadvantages of user name and password security.  
In what ways might users be careless with their identities?  How can such carelessness 
compromise the security of the database?  What steps could be taken to reduce the risk of 
such problems?

User name and password security is currently the most common method for 
authenticating users.  When properly implemented, it is a good system for protecting the 
database and making sure that the database is accessed by the proper users with the 
proper access rights.  In some cases, however, careless users can undermine the system.  
Users may choose passwords that are easy to remember because they have meaning to the 
user such as a date, a pet name, or a family name.  Passwords like these are also easy for 
hackers to guess.  In other cases, users may choose a more complicated password but 
then right it down to remember it, thus revealing it to anyone who can find where it is 
recorded.  Educating the users is an important step in increasing the effectiveness of user 
name and password security.  Systems can also be set up to require passwords of a certain 
complexity, such as requiring numbers and uppercase/lowercase letters.
