David J. Burger
ICS 321 Sec. 452
6/25/01
Take Home Quiz

Using the material we covered about physical data storage and retrieval, as well as 
material in your textbook, discuss potential strategies for allocating media space so as to 
improve database performance.  Be sure to include some discussion about distributing 
data and files between primary storage and secondary storage.

In many database applications, such as personal and smaller workgroup applications, the 
allocation of the media space can be as simple as selecting a directory and letting the 
DBMS handle the rest.  In these cases the database developer is more concerned with the 
structure of the data, normalization, and the indexing of the proper fields.  In other 
database applications, such as large systems deployed in a client-server or mainframe 
environment, critical decisions are made in the allocation of media space.  The speed and 
capacity of a disk, the frequency of data access to a relation or join of relations, the 
amount of data processed in a typical retrieval, the likelihood of queried records being 
clustered together; these factors and more come into play when deciding how to properly 
allocate a database to the available media.

The speed of a disk is determined by many factors that need to be known by the database 
designer.  The speed is characterized by the equation:

Data retrieval time = seek time + latency + data transfer rate + head selection time

In addition, in a distributed environment the speed of the networking connections to the 
various data hosting machines becomes important as well.

Once the speed of the available media is known, the database designer must understand 
his data and how it is accessed.  Many database applications contain data in relations in 
which the amount of data access per relation varies greatly.  Tables that are accessed 
frequently should be placed on the fastest media available.  In certain situations, it may 
even be preferable to keep certain data in primary storage if possible.  An example of this 
would be the database application that is the backbone of a search engine on the internet.  
The extreme number of queries initiated by user searches may indicate a need to place the 
data structure representing the parsed keywords into primary storage.  This would allow 
the fastest lookup possible, reducing the load on the secondary storage system while 
increasing the need for primary storage.

Database tables that are accessed infrequently can be placed on a slower media.  In 
addition, some of the data within a single table, such as the data that is less current time 
wise, may also be accessed infrequently.  This may cause the database designer to 
separate the data, in some sort of archiving scheme such that more current data is kept on 
faster media and the archived data is placed on slower media.

Even the structure of the data within the tables can influence media allocation decisions.  
Tables that are queried in such a way that returned rows tend not be clustered are 
naturally less efficient and this too may be a reason to place a table on faster media.  
Tables that are queried in such a way that rows tend to be clustered are more efficient 
which may lead to placing the table on a slower media.

As you can see, various issues need to be taken into consideration when allocating the 
media space in order to maximize database performance.  The database designer needs to 
be aware these issues so that the database can be implemented in the best possible way.
