Cryptography Politics

NSA (National Security Agency) - was started by Truman in 1952 although its existence 
was denied for some time.  The purpose of the NSA is to decode and listen in on all 
foreign communication of interest to the security of the United States.  NSA is the largest 
employer and mathematicians and the largest purchaser of computer hardware in the 
world.  In the past they have used their power to reduce the public availability of 
cryptography.

NCSC (National Computer Security Center) – A branch of the NSA.  They evaluate 
commercial security products, sponsor and publish research, develop technical 
guidelines, provide advice, support, and training.

NIST (National Institute of Technology Standards) – A division of the U.S. department 
of commerce.  They promote open standards and interoperability to spur economic 
development.  NIST issues standards for cryptographic algorithms.

RSA Data Security – A company founded to develop, license, and market the RSA 
patent.

Public Key Partners – Holders of important patents including RSA and Diffie Hellman.  
These “cover all known methods of practicing the art of public key.”

International Association for Cryptographic Research – State purpose is to advance the 
theory and practice of cryptology and related fields.

Research and Development in Advance Communications Technologies in Europe 
(RACE) -  Puts together security requirements for integrated broadband communication.

Conditional Access for Europe (CAFÉ) – Works on digital payment systems.  Computer 
wallet.

ISO (International Standards Organization) – registers cryptographic algorithms.

IBM owns DES.

Export rules:  Cryptography is treated like a munition.  If you sell cryptography overseas 
without a proper export license you are an international arms smuggler.

Digital Signatures have yet to survive a contest in a legally binding court.

Key escrow with a chip called clipper.  The challenge is to develop a cryptosystem that 
protects individual privacy but at the same time allows for court authorized wire tap.

Tamper proof hardware – Each encryption chip has a unique ID # and secret key.  The 
key is split into two pieces and store by two different escrow agencies with the ID.  It 
sends the ID over the line with communications.

Techniques have to do with key splitting.

No advantage to the user.

Disadvantage?  Have to trust escrow procedures and people.

Clipper Chip – NSA designed tamper resistant VLSI chip designed for encrypting voice 
communications.  It is a escrowed encryption standard.  Uses the skipjack algorithm.  
Each chip has a secret key to encrypt a copy of each user’s message key.  Government 
can recover session key.  LEAF (Law enforcement access field)  Escrow with key split in 
two.  Sandia National Laboratories supposedly reverse engineered.
Phil on PGP, If the information you are trying to protect is more valuable to your attacker 
than the cost of the attack.  He admits his system is not perfect.

1.  Compromised pass phrase and secret key.
2.  Public key tampering.
3.  Not quite deleted files.
4.  Viruses and Trojan horses, can capture pass phrase or secret key.  Zombie-ized PGP 
program source.
5.  Physical security breach.
6.  Tempest attack – remote detection of electromagnetic signals from the computer.
7.  Exposure on muli-user systems.  Best used with an isolated single user machine
8.  Traffic analysis for insight, how long, when, and to who?
9.  Cryptanalysis

IDEA is used in PGP as the conventional symmetric algorithm.
It is insufficient to protect ourselves with laws, we must protect ourselves with 
mathematics.

Cryptography – the art of keeping secure.
Cryptanalysis – breaking cryptography.
Cryptology – the mathematical branch of cryptography and cryptanalysis.

What are the goals of cryptography?
1.  Confidentiality.
2.  Authentication – you can ascertain the origin.
3.  Integrity – verify that it has not be modified or substituted.
4.  Non repudiation – sender not able to falsely deny sending message.

Keyspace is the range of possible key values.

Symmetric algorithm, encryption key can be calculated easily from the decryption key 
and vice versa, or, they are the same.

Stream algorithm – Encryption algorithm that does a bit or byte at a time.

Block algorithm – encrypts a block at a time, often 64 bits.

Public key algorithm – A public key for encryption, private key to decrypt.  Not the 
same, and one can’t easily be calculated from the other in a reasonable amount of time.

Kerchoffs – secret must reside entirely in the key.

Attack types:
1.  Ciphertext only attack.
2.  Known plain text attack.
3.  Chosen plain text attack.
4.  Adaptive chosen plain text attack.
5.  Chosen ciphertext attack.
6.  Chosen key attack.
7.  Rubber hose attack.

Only the one time pad is unbreakable given infinite resources.

One time pad – since every plain text message is equally possible, there is no way for a 
cryptanalyst to determine the correct one.  Not practical for 1.54 Mbps channel.

Even if you guessed the key you would have no way of knowing if the result was the 
correct plain text.

DES – Digital Encryption Standard, done by shifting and transposing bits.
RSA -  Algorithm by Rivest, Shamir, and Adelman.
DSA – Digital signature algorithm.

If Z = X^Y then X = Z^Y

Density of primes around n is approximately n/ln(n).

PGP encryption encrypts to 64 printable characters.  Each one comes from a 6 bit nibble.

PGP uses a public key algorithm to encode key for symmetric algorithm, currently uses 
Difffie Helman for the public key algorithm.  Symmetric has been several things 
currently IDEA I believe.

PGP uses different keys for exchanging session keys and signatures.

In PGP each message has a different session key.

Matt Blaze “You can almost measure it.”  You know the cryptanalysis details but there 
are other means of attack.

Attackers rarely restrict themselves to the clean well defined models of the academic 
world.  p. 620 list.

Respect the limits of the art.

RSA ,

Public key encryption was invented by Diffie and Hellman, and independently by 
Merkle.  e is public, d is private.

All of the algorithms are slow.  Usually too slow to support bulk data encryption.

Hybrid crypto systems speed things up.

A symmetric algorithm is used with a random session key.  The message is encrypted 
with the random session key and the session key is sent encrypted with the public key 
algorithm.

Rivest, Shamir, Adelman.  This has withstood years of cryptanalysis.  Gets security from 
the difficulty of factoring large numbers.

n = pq, choose e such that e and (p-1)(q-1) are relatively prime, find decryption key
d such that ed = 1 mod (p-1)(q-1).  So d = e-1 mod (p-1)(q-1).

C = Me mod n
M = Cd mod n

why?

Cd = (Me)d so = Med = M 1 + k(q-1)(p-1) = M*Mk(q-1)(p-1) = M.

RSA about 1000 times slower than DES in hardware, 100 times slower in software.

It is conjectured that the security of RSA depends on the problem of factoring large 
numbers.  That is factoring n.
Key exchange – Need more from notes.

Sending the encryption key over the same channel that requires encryption is, of course, 
foolish.

Some people solve by the concept of key encryption keys versus data keys.  Of course 
key encryption keys must be distributed manually.

Split key into different parts and send over different channels.

Requirements for hash?

Given M it is very easy to compute H(M).

Given h, it is difficult to compute M such that H(M) = h

Given M, it is hard to find M’ such that H(M) = H(M’)

more notes!

Attack on p. 430, Alice prepares a favorable and unfavorable contract.  Makes subtle 
changes to each producing 2^32 version of each with 2^32 hashes for each.  Looks for a 
match.  Has Bob sign hash for favorable one and then later substitutes unfavorable.  
Works in case of protocol where you only sign a hash.

this attack is feasible so 128 bits is better, and 160 even better!

Key length required for symmetric algorithms.

For RSA?

For secure hash?  see previous.

DES – 

World wide standard for 20 years!  Held up remarkably well against cryptanalysis.  Still 
secure against all but the most powerful adversaries.  Initiated in 1972 by the NBS (now 
NIST).  They wanted a single standard for interoperation.  1973 asked for proposals and 
didn’t get a good one until IBM came up with DES in 1974 (named Lucifer developed at 
IBM during the early 70’s).  1975 NBS publishes details.  Adopted in fall Nov. 23, 1976.  
FIPS pub. in 1977.  NSA though DES was going to be hardware only…they made a 
mistake, because NBS put out enough details to program, NSA wishes they hadn’t done 
this.

It is a block cipher that does 64 bit blocks and has a 56 bit key…encoded in 64 with 
parity bit.  The S box substitution is the critical step.  Same algorithm for encryption / 
decryption with keys used in reverse order.

Original key length was 112, NSA reduced to 56.

In 1993 Michael Wiener designed a $1 million machine that cracks DES in 3.5 hours.

Can be attacked via differential and linear cryptanalysis

Some do triple des, uses des three times with two keys so 2112 keyspace.

Plethra of variants.

Rumors abound that NSA has computers and techniques to crack DES.

Modes!

ECB – electronic code book, great for random access.  Only framing errors will destroy.

CBC – cipher block chaining.
  en – plain text XORed with previous ciphertext block before encrypt.
  de – block decrypted and XORed with feedback register
  uses initialization vector for first block, in decrypt decrypt initialization vector just to 
get the feedback ready.  Errors propagate to two blocks but is self recovering.

CFB – cipher feedback mode, does stream.  uses iv,
            encrypted left most eight bits Xored with first 8 bit character to become first 8 bit 
character of ciphertext.  Same 8 bits become right most byte of queue in shift.

Errors propagate.

Decrypt reverse – Encrypt Xor with cipher, that is your plain and put character in queue.

OFB – Output feedback mode, like CFB but uses n bits.

