1)  Can DES be broken?

Yes, it is possible to use a brute force attack on the keyspace, especially if they are using 
only 56 bit keys.  There are also certain methods of cryptanalysis that can reduce the 
number of keys that need to be checked.  It is possible that the NSA has super powerful 
computers in place to break DES.  A brute-force DES-cracking machine that can find a 
key in an average of 3.5 hours cost only $1 million in 1993!  Susceptible to differential 
and linear cryptanalysis.  Rumors are that statistical algorithms can be used to reduce the 
likely keys such that DES can be cracked in 3 to 15 minutes.

Differential cryptanalysis looks at ciphertext pairs whose plain texts have particular 
differences and analyzes the evolution of these differences as the plaintext propagate 
through the rounds of DES when encrypted with the same key.

2)  Is DES good enough for things such as the transmission of data for business, banking, 
etc.?

When it comes to saying whether or not some sort of encryption is good enough it all 
depends on whether or not the data you are protecting is more valuable than the cost to 
break the cipher that conceals it.  In the case of banking, DES is probably not good 
enough.  For certain business information it may be good enough, however, company 
secrets that need to be kept for many years need something stronger than DES.

3)  If you wanted strong enough encryption to be safe from the NSA, what kind of 
symmetric encryption would you use?

Well I probably wouldn’t use DES as the NSA had a hand in developing it.  What I 
would probably use is AES with a very long key length, however, it is hard to say what 
kind of advanced technology and techniques the NSA has, they could be years ahead of 
everyone else.

4)  What concept or theory would you use to determine how much ciphertext you need to 
cryptanalyze DES?

Differential cryptanalysis.

5)  Based on your experience, without recalculating it, about how much ciphertext would 
you need?

The best attack against full 16-round DES requires 247 chosen plaintexts.

6)  In the following, assume RSA. Assume that Alice is using n and her public key is e 
And private key is d. How does Bob encipher a message to send to Alice?

He takes his message M and computes, C = Me mod n.  This is the ciphertext that he 
sends to Alice.

7)  Why can’t Eve decipher the message?

In order to decipher the message she would have be able to factor n into primes p and q 
so that she can determine the inverse of e mod (p-1)(q-1).  With this inverse, call it d, she 
could decipher the message.  The factoring of such large numbers is a very hard thing to 
do.

8)  Describe how Alice can sign a message using RSA.

She enciphers the message using her private key d.
9)  Why should Bob believe this is really Alice’s signature?

Because only Alice has her private key, if her public key e decrypts the signed message, 
then the message must have been signed and must have come from Alice.

10)  How would you try to break RSA?

You would try to factor n so that you could then determine the inverse of the persons 
public key e.

11)  About how big an n is considered safe for RSA now?

About 1024 bits.

12)  Assume that the gcd(n,k) = 1.  We discussed two ways of finding the inverse of k 
modulo n.  Briefly, what are they?

You can use the Euclidean algorithm or you can compute:

k^phi(n)-1 mod phi(n).

13)  Assume that you are using RSA and know only n and e, i. e. the public
key. Suppose that the GCD of r and n is 1. With only this information, can
you calculate the inverse of r? How?

14)  Roughly, how many 512 bit primes numbers exist, within a factor of 100 or so?

(2^511)/354

15)  Name several things you can do with a good hash function like sha.

You can use the hash as a password scheme, if the pass phrase the person types hashes to 
the correct value they have clearance.

You can use it in an archival type copyright system whereby the person does not even 
need to submit original document.  They only submit a hash of the document which is 
placed in a database with a timestamp.  If the document becomes disputed, the owner can 
be verified by the hash value in the database.

It can be used to do file comparisons on different systems.  If the two files hash to the 
same value, it is extremely likely that they are identical files.

16)  Assume that H(s) is a hash function.  Given s it should be easy to calculate H(s).  It 
is required that given x, it is essentially impossible to find s such that H(s) = x.  What 
undesirable thing is possible if this is not rue?

If the hash is being used and signed with a digital signature algorithm, it would be 
possible to later substitute a different document, probably disadvantageous to one of the 
parties involved in place of the original document, and claim that that was the signed 
document.

17)  It is required that it be almost impossible to find two different values s1 and s2 such 
that H(s1) = H(s2).  What undesirable thing is possible if this is not true?

This leaves the hash open to the birthday attack.  If it is possible to create two messages 
such that the hashes are equal, then one of them can be undesirable to the parties 
involved.  In a protocol where only the hash is signed Alice can have Bob sign the 
contract that is favorable to him and later claim that he had signed the undesirable 
contract.

18)  Explain how Alice and Bob can exchange keys using Diffie Hellman key exchange.

Alice and Bob agree on large prime n and g such that g is primitive mod n.  Then Alice 
chooses large random integer x and Bob chooses large random integer y.  Alice computes 
X = gx mod n and Bob computes Y = gy mod n.  Alice and Bob exchange X and Y and 
Alice computes Yx mod n while Bob computes Xy mod n.  Both of these values compute 
to gxy mod n which can then be used as a session key or as a small one time pad as we did 
for class.  The security comes from the difficult of calculating discrete logarithms in a 
finite field compared to the ease of calculating exponentiation in the same field.

19)  Explain why Eve cannot calculate the session key exchanged in this way.

While Eve knows g, n, X, and Y, she needs to know either x or y, and to do that she 
would have to calculate a discrete logarithm in a finite field of great size.  Therefore she 
cannot find them.

20)  What advantage does DSA have over RSA for a signature?  What is at least one 
advantage of RSA over DSA?

Because the primes used in DSA can be made public, they can be verified to have been 
chosen as valid random primes.  With RSA, these primes cannot be revealed.

RSA has the advantage of being faster than DSA.  Also, DSA was developed by the NSA 
so the potential of a backdoor is always there.

21)  With secret sharing using the LaGrange formula, and using a polynomial of d degree 
r, you need r+1 points to calculate the secret.  How could you break this code if you have 
only r points?  How many digits are required in the numbers used for this protocol for 
reasonable security?

You can’t.  Even an exhaustive search cannot reveal the message.  ??? How many digits?

22)  There was a concept or technique that was used in the protocols described both for 
digital cash and for digital elections, but that we had not discussed before these talks.  
What was it?

Blind signatures.  The concept of using something such as a random multiplication to 
blind the document, then having the signer sign the blind document, and then dividing 
back out the multiplication to produce the original signed document.

23)  Name several kinds of biometric identification that have been investigated.  Is there 
anything of this kind that is commercially available now?

Iris identification, finger print identitfication, facial identification, and voice 
identification are several biometric identification techniques that have been investigated.  
From what I know facial identification has been used at stadium events to locate persons 
with outstanding warrants.  I believe other types of this technology are commercially 
available as well.

24)  You are the security officer for a computing facility and some kind of security 
problem occurs.  Where do you go for help?

Go to CERT.

25)  Judging from the presentations given these past few weeks, what is the most 
important aspect of security that we did not cover in the fifteen units preceding that?

It is difficult to narrow it down to one topic although I think we covered a ton of good 
material in class.  If I had to choose I would have to say that maybe we should have 
covered some of the great worm exposures of all time.


