Everyday Hacks

Movies and television would lead you to believe that hacking activities are carried out by an elite group of computer geniuses.  Individuals with extensive knowledge of platforms, protocols, networks, and computer languages.  While such activity certainly takes place, unless you work for a federal agency or a large corporation you probably have much more to fear from the "script kiddies."  Script kiddie is a slang term used to describe people that use scripts and programs written by expert hackers to attack known exploits and security flaws.  In this paper I will explain what can make you vulnerable to such attacks, I will describe a couple of attacks that might be launched against your computer, and I will describe how you can protect yourself from such attacks.

Using the predominant operating system, Microsoft Windows, makes you more vulnerable to these types of attacks.  Microsoft has been blasted by security experts for the security flaws in there products.  While this is true, they are also well known for these flaws because they have a huge user base, making them a large target.  When a hacker finds an exploit that works against windows he knows that the impact can be devastating, especially in the case of virus type attacks that propagate from one system to another.

One such exploit against windows pertains to the software technology known as peer networking.  As the Microsoft Windows operating system matured they decided to develop peer networking to allow office coworkers to access each others hard drive and peripherals such as printers.  While this is certainly a very useful technolgoy.  Microsfot made the default Windows installation configureation include the sharing of the entire C drive wihtout a password bound to every installed networking protoocol.  Because one of those protocols is likely to be TCP/IP, the hard drive will be availbable to everyone on the internet.

While some simple command line tools can be used to probe an IP for shared drive and to connect to them, the script kiddeie has more powerful tools at his disposal.  One sudch tool ins called Legion.  With Legion you can feed it a range of IP addresses to scan.  It will dutifully scan the range and report all shared hard drives it locates.  Mapping the located hard drive takes only a single mouse click.  It even has the ability to try dictionary attacks against the shared resource if the user has taken steps to password protect it.  Self replicating idea.

What does the script kiddie do after he has connected to your hard drive?  The unimaginative type might snoop through you files, leave you a message, or delete important files leaving you computer unusable.  The more experienced script kiddie will leave a backdoor program on your computer.  Two of the most powerful of these programs are netbus and BO2K (Back Orfice 2000).  By uploading these programs to the blah blah blah they will execute everytime the user powers up the system.  The script kiddie can then connect to the program.  These programs have an amazing number of features such as...keyloggin...more.

How do you protect yourself from such attacks?  Well, first turn off peer networking if you don't need it.  This can be done by....  If you do need peer networking only bind it to the protocols that you need to.  By removing the TCP/IP binding it will only be avail...  Lastly, if you really want to share your hard drive over the internet make sure to add a $ to the end of the share name, this will prevent it from being listed on probes as a shared resource.

Another flagship Microsoft product with a major security "feature" is Microsoft Office (Microsoft's words, not mine).  In the quest to acheive office suite dominance microsoft began to develop a macro language for these products.  In addition, Microsoft facilitated interaction between products via a technology known as com automation.  This, as it turned out, was a deadly combination for hackers to exploit.

In its current incarnation the macro langauge is known as Visual Basic for Applications.  It is quite powerful and has full access to the windows API.  It has hooks into events such as document_open.  While it does prompt the user whether to enable or disable such macro commands when opening a document that contains macros, this prompting can be turned off.  It can even be turned off by the macro code itself.  Thus all it takes is one bad click or an unknowing user to give macro code free reign on your system.  In addition, because of the inter-operability features of the Microsoft products, macro code in any program can iterate through Outlook's address book sending the same malicious code as an attachment to all your closest friends and contacts.

The most famous of these types of attacks was......  It caused this much damage.  Because source code for such attacks is easily available on the internet, a script kiddie can easily modify the code and launch an attack of his own.

So what can you do to protect yourself from this type of attack?  First choose to use products from companies that take security seriously.  Second, because no product is perfect, you must take it upon yourself to become a knowledgeable ocmputer user.  Be aware of the weaknesses in the products you use.  If, for example, you don't know what a macro is you will be highly suscetbile to that type of attack.  Lastly, keep up with the latest exploits by monitoring a web site like CERT.org.  Apply patches as soon as they become available.  With these precautions you can greatly reduce your chances of becoming a victim of the script kiddies.


